Module 6.1, updated images and text. (#5580)
qgis/QGIS-Documentation: docs/training_manual/create_vector_data/create_new_vector.rst

You'll need to open a :guilabel:`Create Layer` dialog that will allow you
to define a new layer.

> #. Navigate to and click on the menu entry :menuselection:`Layer --> Create Layer --> New Shapefile Layer`. You'll be presented with the following dialog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Navigate to and click on the menu entry
   :menuselection:`Layer --> Create Layer --> New Shapefile Layer`.
   You'll be presented with the following dialog.
```

	.. figure:: img/create_vector_layer.png
		:align: center

#. Click :guilabel:`...` for the File name field. A save dialog will appear.
#. Navigate to the ``exercise_data`` directory.
#. Save your new layer as ``school_property.shp``.

	It's important to decide which kind of dataset you want at this stage. Each
	different vector layer type is "built differently" in the background, so once
	you've created the layer, you can't change its type.

	For the next exercise, we're going to be creating new features which describe
	areas. For such features, you'll need to create a polygon dataset.

#. For Geometry Type, select :guilabel:`Polygon` from the drop down menu:

> 	.. figure:: img/polygon_selected.png

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   .. figure:: img/polygon_selected.png
```
Align with the "F" in "For Geometry Type" above.

> 		:align: center

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      :align: center
```
Better avoid tabs

> 	This has no impact on the rest of the dialog, but it will cause the correct

Reviewer: Identation has to be fixed for the complete "paragraph". Three spaces.

You'll need to open a :guilabel:`Create Layer` dialog that will allow you
to define a new layer.

#. Navigate to and click on the menu entry
   :menuselection:`Layer --> Create Layer --> New Shapefile Layer`. 
   You'll be presented with the following dialog.

   .. figure:: img/create_vector_layer.png
     :align: center

#. Click :guilabel:`...` for the File name field. A save dialog will appear.
#. Navigate to the ``exercise_data`` directory.
#. Save your new layer as ``school_property.shp``.

   It's important to decide which kind of dataset you want at this stage. Each
   different vector layer type is "built differently" in the background, so once
   you've created the layer, you can't change its type.

>    For the next exercise, we're going to be creating new features which describe

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   For the next exercise, we're going to create new features which describe
```

   This has no impact on the rest of the dialog, but it will cause the correct
   type of geometry to be used when the vector dataset is created.

>    The next field allows you to specify the Coordinate Reference System, or CRS. CRS is a method of associating numerical coordinates with a position on the surface of the Earth.  See the User Manual on :ref:`Working with Projections<label_projections>` to learn more.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   The next field allows you to specify the Coordinate Reference System,
   or CRS. CRS is a method of associating numerical coordinates with a
   position on the surface of the Earth.
   See the User Manual on :ref:`Working with Projections<label_projections>`
   to learn more.
```

>    For this example we will use the default CRS associated with this project, which  is WGS84.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For this example we will use the default CRS associated with this
   project, which  is WGS84.
```

.. figure:: img/default_crs.png
   :align: center

Next there is a collection of fields grouped under :guilabel:`New Field`.
By default, a new layer has only one attribute, the :kbd:`id` field (which you
should see in the :guilabel:`Fields list`) below. However, in order for the
data you create to be useful, you actually need to say something about the
features you'll be creating in this new layer. For our current purposes, it

> will be enough to add one field called :kbd:`name` that will hold :kbd:`Text data` and will be limited to text length of :kbd:`80` characters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
will be enough to add one field called :kbd:`name` that will hold :kbd:`Text data`
and will be limited to text length of ``80`` characters.
```

	.. figure:: img/raster_added.png
		:align: center

#. If you don't see an aerial image appear, select the new layer image, right click, and click on :guilabel:`Zoom to Layer`.

	.. figure:: img/zoom_to_raster.png
		:align: center

#. Click on the |zoomIn| button, and zoom to the area highlighted in blue below:

	.. figure:: img/map_area_zoom.png
		:align: center

Now you are ready to digitize these three fields:

.. figure:: img/field_outlines.png
   :align: center

Before starting to digitize, let's move the ``school_property`` layer above the aerial image.

#. Select ``school_property`` layer in the :guilabel:`Layers` pane and drag it to the top.

.. figure:: img/move_school_layer.png
	:align: center

In order to begin digitizing, you'll need to enter **edit mode**. GIS software
commonly requires this to prevent you from accidentally editing or deleting
important data. Edit mode is switched on or off individually for each layer.

To enter edit mode for the ``school_property`` layer:

#. Click on the ``school_property`` layer in the :guilabel:`Layer list` to select it.
#. Click on the :guilabel:`Toggle Editing` button: |toggleEditing|

> 	If you can't find this button, check that the :guilabel:`Digitizing` toolbar is

Reviewer: Indentation...

|basic| |TY|
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Digitize the school itself and the upper field. Use this image to assist you:

.. figure:: img/field_outlines.png
     :align: center

Remember that each new feature needs to have a unique ``id`` value!

.. note::  When you're done adding features to a layer, remember to save your
   edits and then exit edit mode.

.. note:: You can style the fill, outline and label placement and formatting
   of the ``school_property`` using techniques learnt in earlier
   lessons. In our example, we will use a dashed outline of light green color
   with no fill.

.. _backlink-create-vector-digitize-1:

|basic| |TY|
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are going to digitize two routes which are not already marked on the roads layer;
one is a path, the other is a track. Our path runs along the southern edge of the suburb of Railton, starting and
ending at marked roads:

.. figure:: img/path_start_end.png
     :align: center

Our track is a little further to the south:

.. figure:: img/track_start_end.png
     :align: center

> #. Create a new line feature called ``routes.shp`` with attributes ``id`` and ``type``. (Use the approach above to guide you.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Create a new ESRI Shapefile line dataset called ``routes.shp``, with attributes ``id`` and
   ``type`` (Use the approach above to guide you.)
```

For our example, you'll be using the digitizing approach. Sample raster datasets
are provided, so you'll need to import them as necessary.

* Click on Data Source Manager button |dataSourceManager| .
* Select :guilabel:`Raster` on the left side.
* In the :guilabel:`Source` panel, click on the :guilabel:`...` button: 
* Navigate to :kbd:`exercise_data/raster/`.
* Select the file :kbd:`3420C_2010_327_RGB_LATLNG.tif`.
* Click :guilabel:`Open` to close the dialogue window.

.. figure:: img/add_raster.png
	:align: center
	
* Click :guilabel:`Add` and :guilabel:`Close`. An image will load into your map.

.. figure:: img/raster_added.png
	:align: center

> * If you don't see an aerial image appear, select the new layer image, right click, and click on :guilabel:`Zoom to Layer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you don't see an aerial image appear, select the new layer image,
  right click, and click on :guilabel:`Zoom to Layer`.
```

.. figure:: img/zoom_to_raster.png
	:align: center

* Click on the |zoomIn| button, and zoom to the area highlighted in blue below:

.. figure:: img/map_area_zoom.png
   :align: center

You'll be digitizing these three fields:

.. figure:: img/field_outlines.png
   :align: center

Before starting to digitize, let's move the :kbd:`school_property` layer above the aerial image.

* Select :kbd:`school_property` layer in the :guilabel:`Layers` pane and drag it to the top.

.. figure:: img/move_school_layer.png
	:align: center

In order to begin digitizing, you'll need to enter **edit mode**. GIS software
commonly requires this to prevent you from accidentally editing or deleting
important data. Edit mode is switched on or off individually for each layer.

To enter edit mode for the :guilabel:`school_property` layer:

* Click on the :kbd:'school_property' layer in the :guilabel:`Layer list` to select it.
* Click on the :guilabel:`Toggle Editing` button: |toggleEditing|

If you can't find this button, check that the :guilabel:`Digitizing` toolbar is
enabled. There should be a check mark next to the :menuselection:`View -->
Toolbars --> Digitizing` menu entry.

> As soon as you are in edit mode, you'll see some digitizing tools are now

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As soon as you are in edit mode, you'll see that some digitizing tools have become
```

active:

  - |capturePolygon|: Add a new feature.
  - |vertexToolActiveLayer|: move only one part of a feature.

Other relevant buttons are still inactive, but will become active when we
start interacting with our new data.

> You will also notice in the :guilabel:`Layers` pane the layer :kbd:`school_layer` symbol now has the pencil icon, indicating the layer is in edit mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Notice that the layer ``school_layer`` in the :guilabel:`Layers` panel
now has the pencil icon, indicating that it is in edit mode.
```

are provided, so you'll need to import them as necessary.

* Click on the :guilabel:`Add Raster Layer` button: |addRasterLayer|

* Click on Data Source Manager button |dataSourceManager| .
* Select :guilabel:`Raster` on the left side.
* In the :guilabel:`Source` panel, click on the :guilabel:`...` button: 
* Navigate to :kbd:`exercise_data/raster/`.
* Select the file :kbd:`3420C_2010_327_RGB_LATLNG.tif`.
* Click :guilabel:`Open`. An image will load into your map.
* Find the new image in the :guilabel:`Layers` panel.
* Click and drag it to the bottom of the list so that you can still see your
  other layers.
* Find and zoom to this area:
* Click :guilabel:`Open` to close the dialogue window.

.. figure:: img/add_raster.png
	:align: center
	
* Click :guilabel:`Add` and :guilabel:`Close`. An image will load into your map.

.. figure:: img/raster_added.png
	:align: center

* If you don't see an aerial image appear, select the new layer image,
  right click, and click on :guilabel:`Zoom to Layer`.

.. figure:: img/zoom_to_raster.png
	:align: center

* Click on the |zoomIn| button, and zoom to the area highlighted in blue below:

.. figure:: img/map_area_zoom.png
   :align: center

> .. note:: If your :guilabel:`buildings` layer symbology is covering part or all of the

Author: Thanks for the question.  It depends what the philosophy is regarding to what layers are to be carried over from a previous module.  In this case "buildings" would be a layer that would have been a product of one of the previous modules in the series and so it would exist.  With this approach, I would have to go through modules 1 through 5 in order to recreate the exact environment for Module 6 (and so would anyone going through this training manual).  Unless if there is a project file I can load that has the exact environment at the end of Module 5?

An alternative, at the beginning of this module I could indicate that this module will start with a new project and provide steps on creating a new project and import layers that are needed.  I looked at the other module 6 sub-sections and I did not see any reference to the "building" layer, so it might be OK to drop it.  I haven't checked to see if any modules after 6 have dependencies on layers that were created in prior modules, so that could cause a problem.

I am fine with either approach, although I think the second approach would make it easier to update the training manual in the future.

> .. note:: If your :guilabel:`buildings` layer symbology is covering part or all of the

Reviewer: I would prefer the modules / lessons to be as self-contained as possible (not depending on previous ones).

   
   .. figure:: img/vertex_selected.png
     :align: center

#. To update the a coordinate, double left click on a cell in the table that you want to edit and enter the updated value. In this example, the x coordinate of row ``4`` is updated from ``20.4450`` to ``20.4444``.

   .. figure:: img/edit_vertex_in_vertex_editor.png
     :align: center
	 
#. After entering the updated value, hit the enter key on your keyboard to apply the change.  You will see the vertex move to the new location in the map window.
#. When done editing, click the |toggleEditing| :sup:`Toggle Editing` button to get out of edit mode, and save your edits.

|basic| |TY| Digitizing Lines
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
We are going to digitize two routes which are not already marked on the roads layer;
one is a path, the other is a track. Our path runs along the southern edge of the suburb of Railton, starting and
ending at marked roads:

.. figure:: img/path_start_end.png
     :align: center

Our track is a little further to the south:

.. figure:: img/track_start_end.png
     :align: center

> #. Create a new ESRI Shapefile line dataset called ``routes.shp``, with attributes ``id`` and ``type`` (Use the approach above to guide you.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Create a new ESRI Shapefile line dataset called ``routes.shp``,
   with attributes ``id`` and ``type`` (use the approach above to guide you.)
```

> #. If the roads layer is not in your map, then add it from the GeoPackage file :file:`training-data.gpkg` included in the :file:`exercise_data` folder of the training data you downloaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. If the roads layer is not in your map, then add it from the
   GeoPackage file :file:`training-data.gpkg` included in the
   :file:`exercise_data` folder of the training data you downloaded.
```

> #. One at a time, digitize the path and the track on the :guilabel:`routes` layer. Try to follow the routes as accurately as possible, adding additional points along corners or turns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. One at a time, digitize the path and the track on the ``routes`` layer.
   Try to follow the routes as accurately as possible, adding additional points along
   corners or turns.
```

> #. Give them the :guilabel:`type` attribute value of ``path`` or ``track``.\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Set the ``type`` attribute value to ``path`` or ``track``.\
```

> #. Use the :guilabel:`Layer Properties` dialog to add styling to your routes. Feel free to give different styles to the path and track.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Use the :guilabel:`Layer Properties` dialog to add styling to your routes.
   Feel free to use different styles for paths and tracks.
```

> #. Save your edits and toggle off editing mode by pressing the |toggleEditing| :sup:`Toggle Editing` button.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Save your edits and toggle off editing mode by pressing the
   |toggleEditing| :sup:`Toggle Editing` button.
```

* Click :guilabel:`OK` and you've created a new feature!

.. figure:: img/new_feature.png
	:align: center
	

> * In the :guilabel:`Layers` pane select the :kbd:`school_property` layer, right click, and click on :guilabel:`Open Attribute Table`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In the :guilabel:`Layers` panel select the :kbd:`school_property` layer, right click,
  and click on :guilabel:`Open Attribute Table`.
```

.. figure:: img/open_attribute_table.png
	:align: center
	

> In the table you will see the feature you just added.  While in edit mode you can update the attributes data by double click on the cell you want to update.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the table you will see the feature you just added.
While in edit mode you can update the attributes data by double click on the cell
you want to update.
```

..	figure:: img/feature_table.png
	:align: center

* Close the attribute table.
* To save the new feature we just created click on the Save Edits button: |saveEdits|

Remember, if you've made a mistake while digitizing a feature, you can always
edit it after you're done creating it. If you've made a mistake, continue
digitizing until you're done creating the feature as above. Then:

* Click on |vertexToolActiveLayer| Vertex Editor tool.
* Hover the mouse over a vertex you want to move and *left-click* on the vertex.

> * Move the mouse to the correct location of the vertex, and *left-click*.  This will move the vertext to the new location.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Move the mouse to the correct location of the vertex, and *left-click*.
  This will move the vertext to the new location.
```

.. figure:: img/select_vertex.png
	:align: center
.. figure:: img/moved_vertext.png
	:align: center

> The same procedure can be used to move a line segment, but you will need to hover over the midpoint of the line segment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The same procedure can be used to move a line segment, but you will need to
hover over the midpoint of the line segment.
```

Another way to edited the feature is by manually entering the coordinates for each vertex.  

* Make sure the Vertex Editor tool |vertexToolActiveLayer| is still active.
* Move the mouse over the feature and *right-click* on it.
* A :guilabel:`Vertex Editor` pane will appear.  

.. figure:: img/vertex_editor_table.png
	:align: center
	

> * Click on a row, then look at the feature the corresponding vertex circle color will change to blue.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Click on a row, and notice that for this feature the vertex circle color will change to blue.
```

> * Double *left-click* in the table on the x or y coordinate you want to edit and enter the updated value. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Double *left-click* in the table on the x or y coordinate you want to edit and enter the
  updated value. 
```

	
.. figure:: img/edit_vertext_in_vertex_editor.png
	:align: center
	
If you want to undo a change, you can undo changes by pressing the Undo button |undo|.
	
* Remember to save your changes by clicking the Save Edits button |saveEdits|.

To enable the remaining feature editing tools, one needs to select the feature.

* Click on the Select Rectange button |selectRectangle| in the Attributes Toolbar.
* Click on the feature that was just created and this will enable the remaining buttons.

.. figure:: img/all_active_buttons.png
	:align: center

> Here is a summary of what editing action of these buttons:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a summary of the editing actions of these buttons:
```

- |deleteSelectedFeatures|: delete the selected feature.
- |editCut| : cut the selected feature.
- |editCopy|: copy the selected feature.
- |editPaste|: paste a cut or copied feature back into the map.

> * When done editing, click the Toggle Editing button |toggleEditing| to get out of edit mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When done editing, click the Toggle Editing button |toggleEditing| to get
  out of edit mode, and save your edits.
```

* Click :guilabel:`OK` and you've created a new feature!

.. figure:: img/new_feature.png
	:align: center
	

> * In the :guilabel:`Layers` panel select the :kbd:`school_property` layer, right click,

Reviewer 2: I've nee told that it's better to have one point one action
```suggestion
* In the :guilabel:`Layers` panel select the :kbd:`school_property` layer
* Right click and press :guilabel:`Open Attribute Table`.
```
Of course, in a numbered list ;)

>   and click on :guilabel:`Open Attribute Table`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

.. figure:: img/open_attribute_table.png
	:align: center
	
In the table you will see the feature you just added.
While in edit mode you can update the attributes data by double click on the cell
you want to update.

..	figure:: img/feature_table.png
	:align: center

* Close the attribute table.
* To save the new feature we just created click on the Save Edits button: |saveEdits|

Remember, if you've made a mistake while digitizing a feature, you can always
edit it after you're done creating it. If you've made a mistake, continue
digitizing until you're done creating the feature as above. Then:

> * Click on |vertexToolActiveLayer| Vertex Editor tool.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Click on |vertexToolActiveLayer| :sup:`Vertex tool`.
```

* Hover the mouse over a vertex you want to move and *left-click* on the vertex.
* Move the mouse to the correct location of the vertex, and *left-click*.
  This will move the vertext to the new location.

> .. figure:: img/select_vertex.png

Reviewer 2: any reason of the margin left at the top in the image?

	:align: center

> .. figure:: img/moved_vertext.png

Reviewer 2: It does not hurt as long as they are inline but maybe worth fixing this typo in file name ?
```suggestion
.. figure:: img/moved_vertex.png
```

	:align: center

The same procedure can be used to move a line segment, but you will need to
hover over the midpoint of the line segment.

> Another way to edited the feature is by manually entering the coordinates for each vertex.  

Author: I agree, it probably belongs in an advanced level.

> * Make sure the Vertex Editor tool |vertexToolActiveLayer| is still active.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Make sure the |vertexToolActiveLayer| :sup:`Vertex Tool` is still active.
```

* Move the mouse over the feature and *right-click* on it.
* A :guilabel:`Vertex Editor` pane will appear.  

.. figure:: img/vertex_editor_table.png
	:align: center
	

> * Click on a row, and notice that for this feature the vertex circle color will change to blue.

Reviewer 2: How about doing it the other way, ie select in the map canvas and see it become blue in both areas? Why? because if the feature is not enough zoomed out (I'm not sure we asked to "zoom to" the feature, and I assume the user would have zoomed in in order to play with the vertex tool), the clicked row in the editpr can be out of the view. OTOH, selecting in the canvas, "pans" the editor to the selected row

Author: I like that idea, thanks.

* Double *left-click* in the table on the x or y coordinate you want to edit and enter the
  updated value. 
	

> .. figure:: img/edit_vertext_in_vertex_editor.png

Reviewer 2: Same file name "typo"
```suggestion
.. figure:: img/edit_vertex_in_vertex_editor.png
```

	:align: center
	

> If you want to undo a change, you can undo changes by pressing the Undo button |undo|.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to undo a change, you can undo changes by pressing the
|undo| :sup:`Undo` button or pressing :kbd:`Ctrl+Z`.
```

> * Remember to save your changes by clicking the Save Edits button |saveEdits|.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Remember to save your changes by clicking the |saveEdits| :sup:`Save Edits` button.
```

> To enable the remaining feature editing tools, one needs to select the feature.

Reviewer 2: Do we need this last part (or from the "here is a summary of the editing tool")? It looks more of something we left them find in the user manual

Author: Good point.  Is there a good way to add a link that would take them to the appropriate section in the user manual?

> * Click on the Select Rectange button |selectRectangle| in the Attributes Toolbar.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Click on the |selectRectangle| :sup:`Select Features` button in the Attributes Toolbar.
```

* Click on the feature that was just created and this will enable the remaining buttons.

.. figure:: img/all_active_buttons.png
	:align: center

Here is a summary of the editing actions of these buttons:

- |deleteSelectedFeatures|: delete the selected feature.
- |editCut| : cut the selected feature.
- |editCopy|: copy the selected feature.
- |editPaste|: paste a cut or copied feature back into the map.

> * When done editing, click the Toggle Editing button |toggleEditing| to get

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* When done editing, click the |toggleEditing| :sup:`Toggle Editing` button to get
```

* Create a new line feature called :kbd:`routes.shp` with attributes :kbd:`id`
  and :kbd:`type`. (Use the approach above to guide you.)

> We're going to digitize two routes which are not already marked on the roads layer; one is a path, the other is a track. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are going to digitize two routes which are not already marked on the roads layer;
one is a path, the other is a track. 
```

> * If the roads layer is not in your map, then add it from the GeoPackage file :file:`training-data.gpk` included in the :file:`exercise_data` folder of the training data you downloaded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the roads layer is not in your map, then add it from the GeoPackage file
  :file:`training-data.gpk` included in the :file:`exercise_data` folder of the
  training data you downloaded.
```

* Create a new line feature called :kbd:`routes.shp` with attributes :kbd:`id`
  and :kbd:`type`. (Use the approach above to guide you.)

We are going to digitize two routes which are not already marked on the roads layer;
one is a path, the other is a track. 

* If the roads layer is not in your map, then add it from the GeoPackage file

>   :file:`training-data.gpk` included in the :file:`exercise_data` folder of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  :file:`training-data.gpkg` included in the :file:`exercise_data` folder of the
```

#. If the roads layer is not in your map, then add it from the
   GeoPackage file :file:`training-data.gpkg` included in the
   :file:`exercise_data` folder of the training data you downloaded.
#. Activate edit mode.

> #. Since you are working with a line feature, click on the |addLineFeature| :sup:`Add Line` button to initiate line digitizing mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Since you are working with a line feature, click on the
   |addLineFeature| :sup:`Add Line` button to initiate line
   digitizing mode.
```
